--- Page 1 ---
IEEEINTERNETOFTHINGSJOURNAL,VOL.10,NO.10,15MAY2023 8645
Semisupervised Federated-Learning-Based Intrusion
Detection Method for Internet of Things
Ruijie Zhao , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Yijun Wang , Zhi Xue,
Tomoaki Ohtsuki , Senior Member, IEEE, Bamidele Adebisi , Senior Member, IEEE,
and Guan Gui , Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—Federatedlearning(FL)hasbecomeanincreasingly I. INTRODUCTION
popular solution for intrusion detection to avoid data privacy
INTERNETofThings(IoT)hasdevelopedrapidlyinrecent
leakage in Internet of Things (IoT) edge devices. Existing FL-
yearsandprovidesusefulservicesinmultipleapplications,
based intrusion detection methods, however, suffer from three
limitations:1)modelparameterstransmittedineachroundmay such as health and transportation systems. In the meantime, a
be used to recover private data, which leads to security risks; greatnumberofIoTdeviceslackappropriatesecuritydefenses
2) not independent and identically distributed (non-IID) private
andtherefore,intruderscaneasilytargetmanyofthem[1]–[6].
data seriously adversely affect the training of FL (especially
Thus, it is of vital importance to adopt intrusion detection
distillation-based FL); and 3) high communication overhead
causedbythelargemodelsizegreatlyhinderstheactualdeploy- systems (IDS) for IoT devices. Benefiting from the develop-
ment of the solution. To address these problems, this article ment of deep learning (DL) technology, DL-based methods
develops an intrusion detection method based on a semisuper- have achieved great success in the field of traffic analysis and
vised FL scheme via knowledge distillation. First, our proposed
intrusion detection [7]–[14]. Typically, centralized DL (CDL)
method leverages unlabeled data via distillation method to
techniques collect a large amount of traffic data from vari-
enhance the classifier performance. Second, we build a model
based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for extracting ous IoT devices and upload these data to a central server for
deep features of the traffic packets, and take this model as training a deep neural network (DNN) model, which is used
both the classifier network and discriminator network. Third,
for detection. Although these CDL methods can achieve high
the discriminator is designed to improve the quality of each
accuracy in intrusion detection task, there exists a problem
client’s predicted labels, and to avoid the failure of distilla-
tion training caused by a large number of incorrect predictions of information leakage, i.e., private-sensitive raw data are
under private non-IID data. Moreover, the combination of the uploaded to the central server and possibly abused by the
hard-label strategy and voting mechanism further reduces com- server.ToaddresstheproblemofprivatedataleakageofCDL,
munication overhead. The experiments on the real-world traffic
federated learning (FL) is applied in IDS recently [15]–[20].
data set with three non-IID scenarios show that our proposed
In the FL framework, devices collaboratively train their local
methodcanachievebetterdetectionperformanceaswellaslower
communication overhead than state-of-the-art methods. DL models through the periodical exchange and aggregation
of DL model parameters or gradients at the central server
Index Terms—Federated learning (FL), intrusion detection,
knowledge distillation, semisupervised learning. without uploading their raw data. However, since traditional
FL requires clients to frequently upload the parameters of
the DL model, its high communication overhead seriously
Manuscript received 8 February 2022; revised 12 April 2022; accepted hinders actual deployment [21]–[27]. Besides, IoT devices
13 May 2022. Date of publication 18 May 2022; date of current version are usually large scale, which means that a large number of
9 May 2023. This work was supported in part by the Cyber Security from
devices (clients) need to upload information (e.g., gradients
theNationalKeyResearchandDevelopmentProgramofShanghaiJiaoTong
University under Grant 2019QY0703; in part by the Japan Society for the and parameters) when applying FL, resulting in more expen-
PromotionofScience(JSPS)KAKENHIunderGrantJP19H02142;inpartby sive communication overhead [28]. What is worse, there have
theSummitoftheSixTopTalentsProgramofJiangsuunderGrantXYDXX-
been many attacks that can restore the raw data of client from
010;andinpartbytheProjectoftheKeyLaboratoryofUniversalWireless
Communications (BUPT) of Ministry of Education of China under Grant theuploadedmodelparameters,whichmeansthatthisscheme
KFKT-2020106.(Correspondingauthors:YijunWang;GuanGui.) still poses the security risk of information leakage [29].
Ruijie Zhao, Yijun Wang, and Zhi Xue are with the School
Recently,thefederateddistillation(FD)schemeisproposed
of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao
tong University, Shanghai 200240, China (e-mail: ruijiezhao@sjtu.edu.cn; toreducethecommunicationoverheadandsecurityriskcaused
ericwyj@sjtu.edu.cn;zxue@sjtu.edu.cn). byexchangingmodelparameters[30]–[32].ClientsinFDcan
Tomoaki Ohtsuki is with the Department of Information and Computer
upload outputs of DL model rather than model parameters
Science, Keio University, Yokohama 108-8345, Japan (e-mail: ohtsuki@
keio.jp). to the server. Then, the server aggregates outputs, also called
Bamidele Adebisi is with the Department of Engineering, Faculty of
local logits. The aggregated local logits, i.e., global logits are
Science and Engineering, Manchester Metropolitan University, Manchester
M15GD,U.K.(e-mail:b.adebisi@mmu.ac.uk). downloaded and used by clients in further local training pro-
Guan Gui is with the College of Telecommunications and Information cess. Although FD reduces the communication overhead and
Engineering, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing
achieves similar accuracy to that of FL based on independent
210003,China(e-mail:guiguan@njupt.edu.cn).
DigitalObjectIdentifier10.1109/JIOT.2022.3175918 and identically distributed (IID) data, the performance of FD
2327-4662(cid:2)c 2022IEEE.Personaluseispermitted,butrepublication/redistributionrequiresIEEEpermission.
Seehttps://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.htmlformoreinformation.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Bahcesehir Kibris University. Downloaded on January 01,2026 at 12:53:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- Page 2 ---
8646 IEEEINTERNETOFTHINGSJOURNAL,VOL.10,NO.10,15MAY2023
is poor when the distribution of data is not IID (non-IID). packets are familiar or not, which improves the quality
As data distribution is non-IID, the local data of device does of each client’s predicted labels. In addition, the combi-
not represent the population distribution and the global logits nation of the hard-label strategy and voting mechanism
retain similar information to the local labels already attached further reduces communication overhead.
to each device. Training based on global logits can be almost 4) We construct three challenging non-IID scenarios and
identical to training based on a local data set. Hence, several evaluateSSFLonthereal-worldIoTtrafficdataset.The
practical applications of FL-based intrusion detection method experimental results show that our scheme can achieve
should achieve these aims. better detection performance as well as lower commu-
1) Security: FL is proposed to protect users’ data privacy. nication overhead thanstate-of-the-artmethods. Thus,it
Hence,theFL-basedschemesshouldensureprivatedata issuitableforfederatedtraininganddetectingintrusions
cannot be obtained or restored. in the IoT network.
2) Accuracy: Clients often have non-IID private data in The remainder of this article is organized as follows.
real-world IoT network, so FL training needs to avoid Section II reviews the state-of-art methods used in IDS. In
the adverse effects of non-IID data. Section III, we introduce the baseline schemes for feder-
3) Efficiency: Successful deployment of the scheme in ated training, including the FL scheme, the FD scheme, and
a real-life environment requires the FL method with the distillation-based semisupervised FL (DS-FL) scheme.
The details of our method are described in Section IV. In
low communication overhead. This is to ensure timely
Section V, we experimentally evaluate the performances of
delivery of the final model.
SSFL. Finally, we conclude this article in Section VI.
To address these challenges mentioned above, we develop
a semisupervised FL scheme via knowledge distillation for
intrusion detection, denoted as semisupervised FL method II. RELATEDWORKS
(SSFL),whichconsistsofmultipleclientsandacentralserver. A. DL-Based IDS
Specifically,theclientfirstdownloadstheunlabeledopendata
Researchers have proposed many intrusion detection meth-
from the central server, and this step is performed only once
ods to defend against cyber attacks. In general, IDSs are
for each client. The easy-to-obtain unlabeled traffic data does
divided into three categories: 1) rule-based IDS; 2) ML-based
notrequiremanuallabeling,whichsaveslaborandtimecosts.
IDS; and 3) DL-based IDS. The rule-based IDS determines
Then,thelocalnon-IIDlabeleddataareusedtotrainthefirst-
whether the traffic matches the corresponding rule, which is
stage classifier network. Since the first-stage classifier cannot
based on the collected abnormal samples. The main draw-
learn some traffic categories that are not in the local labeled
backs of rule-based IDS are that some key features (e.g.,
data set, it may make incorrect predictions for unfamiliar
port number) prone to failure in a complex network envi-
unlabeled traffic data. Thus, we introduce a discriminator to
ronment, and it is difficult to detect unknown intrusions. In
discriminate whether the unlabeled traffic packets are “famil-
recent years, to better analyze the complex network traffic,
iar,”inwhichtheunfamiliartrafficpacketswillbemarked,so
someMLalgorithmshavebeenappliedinthefieldofintrusion
astoimprovethequalityofthepredictedsoftlabels.Notethat
detection [33]–[37]. Although the ML-based IDSs can detect
both the classifier network and the discriminator network use
unknownintrusionsbasedonthepayloadorstatisticalfeatures
the model based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs),
of the traffic effectively, they usually rely heavily on feature
which can effectively extract the deep features of the traffic
engineeringandcanonlyextractshallowfeatures.Someworks
packet. Next, in order to further reduce communication cost,
have proposed methods based on DL algorithms for intrusion
the client converts soft labels into hard labels and uploads
detectionanddemonstratedbetterperformance thanMLalgo-
them to the central server. After the central server has col-
rithms. For instance, Mirsky et al. [7] designed an ensemble
lected the predictions of all clients, the global labels of the
of neural networks to collectively differentiate between nor-
unlabeled open data are determined through a voting mecha-
mal and abnormal traffic, which can realize low-complexity
nism, rather than directly aggregating. Finally, the aggregated
onlineprocessing.Linetal.[13]proposedatime-relatedintru-
labelsaresenttoeachclientfortrainingthesecond-stageclas-
siondetectionmethodbasedonthestackedsparseautoencoder
sifier. The above steps are repeated to achieve an excellent
(SSAE) and recurrent neural network (RNN), which effec-
performance model for intrusion detection via SSFL. Hence,
tively extracts features with the greedy layerwise strategy for
the main contributions of this article can be summarized as
better detection performance. Andresini et al. [14] proposed
follows.
to use a CNN architecture that is trained on the imagery rep-
1) WeproposeanSSFLforintrusiondetection,whichuses
resentation of the network flows to detect the attacking flow
unlabeled data and knowledge distillation to achieve
behavior.Obviously,DL-basedmethodshaveachievedsuccess
a privacy-preserving and communication-efficient FL-
inthefieldofintrusiondetection,buttheyrelyonalargenum-
based intrusion detection method for IoT.
beroftrafficsamplestotrainamodelwithexcellentdetection
2) A CNN-based model is developed for extracting the
performance.Sincethesedatahaveuser’sprivateinformation,
deep features of the traffic packet, and take this model
mostusersareunwillingtoprovideit.Ontheotherhand,some
as both the classifier network and the discriminator
laws (e.g., GDPR)1 on data privacy have strict regulations on
network.
the use of user data.
3) To make our scheme more effective, we design a dis-
criminatortomakeadistinctionastowhetherthetraffic 1https://gdpr.eu/data-privacy
Authorized licensed use limited to: Bahcesehir Kibris University. Downloaded on January 01,2026 at 12:53:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- Page 3 ---
ZHAOetal.:SEMISUPERVISEDFEDERATED-LEARNING-BASEDINTRUSIONDETECTIONMETHOD 8647
B. FL-Based IDS More specifically, we consider there are K clients partic-
ipating FL and each client k = 1,2,3,...,K has a private
FL is proposed for privacy-sensitive data, which is in con-
labeled data set Dk = {(xk,yk)|i = 1,2,...,n}, where xk,
trast to CDL that requires to collect private data of the i i i
yk, and n, respectively, represent the vectorized feature of a
user. Recently, due to privacy advantages, the FL method i
sample, the one-hot label of the sample, and the number of
has been widely used in IDS and IoT. Kang et al. [16] first
samples in the data set Dk. For an L-class classification task,
introduced reputation as the metric to measure the reliabil-
yk is a one-hot vector, i.e., yk = [yk ,yk ,...,yk ]T. For
ity and trustworthiness of the mobile devices for reliable FL. i i i,0 i,1 i,L−1
Popoola et al. [17] proposed an FL method for detecting the simplicity, we, respectively, concatenate {xk|i = 1,2,...,n}
i
zero-day botnet attack to avoid data privacy leakage in IoT and {yk|i=1,2,...,n} as matrices named Xk and Yk.
i
edge devices. Al-Marri et al. [18] proposed to use mimic Beforethetrainingofthefirstcommunicationround,theDL
learning inFLframeworktoovercome theproblem ofreverse modelofclientkisinitializedwiththeDLmodeloftheserver,
engineering in FL to minimize the risk of jeopardizing users’ i.e., wk ← ws, where ws and wk, respectively, represent the
privacy in IDS. Hei et al. [19] proposed the FL framework initialparametersoftheDLmodeloftheserverandinitialized
for IDS and this framework stored the model training process parameters of the DL model of client k.
informationandbehaviorontheblockchaintomeetthestorage In the training step of first communication round, client k
needsofalargenumberofalerttrainingdatainrealscenarios. trains its DL model with its private data set. Then, each client
Zhangetal.[20]proposedanovelsemisupervisedFLmethod k = 1,2,3,...,K uploads the model parameters wk to the
that leverages unlabeled data to train an unsupervised model server.Theserveraggregatestheparametersandgeneratesnew
based on consistency regularization, and then they aggregate parameters ws as follows:
the unsupervised model, supervised model, and global model (cid:2)K Nk
into a new global model. ws = wk (1)
N
However, the DL-based model has a huge amount of k=1
parameters, which makes the client suffer from the commu- w(cid:3)here N is the total number of private samples i.e., N =
nication bottleneck. To reduce the communication overhead K Nk. In the second communication round, new param-
k=1
in FL-based schemes, some researchers have applied various eters of DL model of server are broadcast to each client,
methods. Liu et al. [28] proposed an efficient communication i.e., wk ← ws and the above processes will loop for several
FL scheme, which uses the gradient compression mechanism communication rounds.
based on top-k selection in FL-based IDS to reduce the com-
munication overhead. Qin et al. [38] used binarized neural B. Baseline 2: FD Scheme
networks in FL-based IDS to keep the communication over-
ClientsparticipatingintheFDschemedonotneedtoupload
heads of training small. Although the above methods reduce
parameters, instead, all clients need to upload the averaged
the communication overhead, it will scale up according to
predictions of each label, which reduces communication over-
the model size. Inspired by some works of the distillation-
headthroughoutthetrainingprocess[30].Theprivatedataset
based FL method [30], [31], we develop a semisupervised FL
Dk owned by client k can be divided into L subsets accord-
schemeforintrusiondetection,whichtransmitsthepredictions ing to the labels, i.e., Dk = Dk,0 ∪Dk,1 ∪···∪Dk,L−1. For
ofunlabeleddatainsteadofmodelparametersineachroundof a subset Dk,l = {(xk,l,yk,l)|i = 1,2,3,...,n}, each sam-
training. Moreover, we propose a discriminator for improving i i
ple’s label is a one-hot vector represent the label is l, i.e.,
the quality of each client’s predicted labels. The results show yk,l = [yk,l,yk,l,...,yk,l,...,yk,l ]T where yk,l = 1 and
that our method outperforms state of the art on the real-world i i,0 i,1 i,l i,L−1 i,l
others are 0. There are six steps in the FD method.
traffic data set, as detailed in the later experiment section.
First, each client k trains its local model wk with the data
set Dk, which is same as FL. Then each client computes the
III. PRELIMINARIES average value of each label also called a local-average logit
vector. The detail is as follows:
Inthissection,wesummarizethebaselineschemesforfed- (cid:4) (cid:5)
erated training, including the FL scheme, the FD scheme, and yˆk,l =F xk,l|wk (2)
i i
the DS-FL scheme, detailed as follows.
(cid:2)Nk,l
y¯k,l = 1 yˆk,l. (3)
Nk,l i
A. Baseline 1: FL Scheme i=1
The process of the FL scheme consists of four steps. First, Note that client k may not have the samples of which label
IoT devices or mobile phones participating FL, called clients is l, i.e., Dk,l = ∅. In such situation, the local-average logit
as per terminology, train their DL model with private data vector of label l is 0, i.e., y¯k,l =0.
sets. Second, each client uploads the parameters of model to Afterthat,eachclientuploadsthelocal-averagelogitvectors
a central server. The server adds up the parameters from each
{y¯k,0,y¯k,1,...,y¯k,L−1}
to the server. Then, the global-average
client and calculates the average value of the parameters to logitvectorsarebroadcasttoeachclient.Eachclientcomputes
obtainnewparameters.Finally,thenewparametersarebroad- new local-average logit vectors based on them as follows:
(cid:4) (cid:5)
casttoeachclientandtheneachclientcontinuestheloopuntil 1
y¯k,l ← Nl×y¯s,l−y¯k,l . (4)
training converges. Nl−1
Authorized licensed use limited to: Bahcesehir Kibris University. Downloaded on January 01,2026 at 12:53:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- Page 4 ---
8648 IEEEINTERNETOFTHINGSJOURNAL,VOL.10,NO.10,15MAY2023
Fig.1. OverviewofproposedsemisupervisedFLschemeforintrusiondetection.OurCNN-basedclassifieristrainedonthelabeledlocaldatawithsupervised
trainingandonunlabeledopendatawithdistillationtraining.Furthermore,weintroducemultiplemechanismstojointlyimprovethequalityofgloballabels.
Note that the local-average logit vector y¯k,l of each sample xk When T is less than 1, the distribution of p will be sharper,
i i j
whosegroundtruthlabelislisequaltoy¯k,l.Inthenext,client
which means that the information entropy is reduced. The
k trains its model with the new local-average logit vectors motivation for reducing the entropy of global logits is to
and the ground-truth label. Although FD greatly reduces the accelerate and stabilize DS-FL, particularly in non-IID data
communicationoverhead,theperformanceofFDispoorwhen distributions [31].
the distribution is non-IID. Here, P ˆs , the matrix denoting the concatenated {pˆs|i =
j
1,2,...,No}, is then broadcast to each client. Finally, each
C. Baseline 3: DS-FL Scheme client trains its DL model with the global logits. More
The DS-FL scheme [31] consists six steps and each client specifically, the process, called distillation, is as follows:
(cid:4) (cid:5)
not only holds a labeled private data set Dk but also an unla- wk ←wk−γ∇ψ P ˆk,P ˆs . (9)
beled data set Do = {xo|j = 1,2,...,No}, where xo and No,
j j
respectively, represent the vectorized feature of a sample and Inaddition, the server has aglobal model ws and theserver
thenumberofsamplesintheopendataset.Forsimplicity,we trains the global model with the shared unlabeled data set and
useamatrixXo todenotetheconcatenatedvectorizedsamples the global logits, i.e.,
of Do. (cid:4) (cid:8) (cid:9) (cid:5)
Inthefirststepofthefirstcommunicationround,eachclient ws ←ws−γ∇ψ F Xo|ws ,P ˆs . (10)
trainsitsDLmodelwithprivatelabeleddataset,whichissame
The above procedures are looped for a number of com-
as FL, as shown in (1). The next step is called “Prediction”
municationrounds.EachclientintheDS-FLmethodneedsto
step: each client k makes predictions, i.e., local logits for the
trainitslocalmodelwithprivatedataset;however,thetrained
unlabeled samples as follows:
(cid:4) (cid:5) model makes predictions on open data set. If the distribution
pˆk =F xo|wk (5) of private data set is non-IID, the distribution of samples in
j j
open data set can be extremely different from that of the pri-
andweusethematrixP ˆk torepresenttheconcatenated{pˆk|j= vate data set so this can result in wrong predictions on the
j
1,2,...,No} of the DL model. Then, each client uploads the part of the trained model and subsequently lower the quantity
local logits to the central server. Then, the server aggregates of local logits.
the local logits and reduces the entropy of global logits pˆs as
j
follows: IV. PROPOSEDSSFLSCHEME
(cid:2)K
1 In this section, we first introduce the CNN-based detection
pˆs = pˆk (6)
j K j model.Then,theproposedSSFLmethodisdescribedindetail.
(cid:4)k=1 (cid:5)
The overview of our approach is shown in Fig. 1.
pˆs ←S pˆs|T (7)
j j
where S(·|T) is the softmax function with the T temperature, A. CNN-Based Baseline Model
i.e., The CNN model has a strong feature extraction ability and
(cid:4) (cid:5)
(cid:4) (cid:5) exp
pˆs
j
it can promote the information interaction between adjacent
S pˆs|T = T(cid:6) (cid:7). (8) time windows and features, so we apply CNN in our model
j (cid:3) L−1exp pˆs j,l forextractingthedeepfeaturesofthetrafficpacket.Thedetails
l=0 T of the CNN-based baseline model are shown in Table I.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Bahcesehir Kibris University. Downloaded on January 01,2026 at 12:53:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- Page 5 ---
ZHAOetal.:SEMISUPERVISEDFEDERATED-LEARNING-BASEDINTRUSIONDETECTIONMETHOD 8649
TABLEI
it is difficult for the client model (i.e., trained with non-IID
DETAILSOFCNN-BASEDBASELINEMODEL
data)togeneratehigh-qualitylogitsontheunlabeledopendata
set, we introduce multiple mechanisms to jointly improve the
quality of logits.
We consider there are K clients and each client k ∈
{1,2,...,K} has two data sets: 1) a private labeled data set
Dk,c = {(xk,c,yk,c)|i = 1,2,...,n} and 2) an unlabeled open
i i
datasetDo ={xo|j=1,2,...,No}sharedallovertheclients.
j
For the L-class classification task,
yk,c
is a one-hot vector.
i
In addition, each client has a classifier model
wk,c,
which is
trained with the private data set. Moreover, each client has a
discriminator
wk,d.
We describe the details as follows.
1) Train the Classifier: First, each client k trains its clas-
sifier
wk,c
with the labeled private data set. This detail is
expressed as
(cid:4) (cid:5)
wk,c ←wk,c−γ∇ψ
Y
ˆk,c,Yk,c
(11)
where ψ(·,·) denotes the loss function, which is minimized
ˆk,c
in this step, Y represents the output of the classifier model
function F, i.e., Y ˆk,c =F(Xk,c|wk,c), and γ denotes the learn-
ing rate. For multiclassification tasks, the loss function can be
a cross-entropy function. Then, each sample in Do is passed
through the classifier, which makes prediction on it and the
confidence score of the sample is computed as
(cid:4) (cid:5) (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:5)(cid:5)
Except for the output layer, the structure of the classifier ck,o =max pˆk =max F xo|wk,c . (12)
j j j
network and the discriminator network is the same. Each
model has eight convolutional layers to extract the feature 2) Train the Discriminator: We first create an empty set
maps of the traffic packet features effectively and two fully Dk,d = ∅. Then, a sample xo j will be added in this set if the
connected layers to output the prediction results of the model. confidence score is less than a boundary number θ and the
The input channels of the first convolutional layer are 23, sample will be discriminated as “unfamiliar” to client k. The
which is equal to the number of rows of the input. Each layer process is described as
(cid:10)(cid:4) (cid:5) (cid:11)
of the first four convolutional layers of the model has 64 con-
volutionkernelsandthekernelsizeis3.Eachlayerofthelast Dk,d =Dk,d∪ xo j ,[0,1]T |ck j ,o <θ (13)
fourconvolutionallayershas128kernelsandthekernelsizeis
same as the first four layer. Finally, the output of the last con- where we use one-hot label [0,1]T to denote the unfamiliar
volutionallayerisflattenedandamultilayerperceptron(MLP) label. What is more, we consider each sample in the private
with three fully connected layers is used for classification. data set is “familiar” to the client k, so all the samples in pri-
The final layer of the classifier network and the discriminator vate data set are added into
Dk,d
and the labels are “familiar.”
network has 11 and 2 neurons, respectively. The process is expressed as
Since our work focuses more on the design of an efficient (cid:10)(cid:4) (cid:5) (cid:11)
federated training framework, we only briefly describe the
Dk,d =Dk,d∪ xk,c,[1,0]T |i=1,2,...,Nk,c
(14)
i
structure of our CNN-based model. Note that our federated
training scheme does not aggregate model parameters, which whereweuseone-hotlabel[1,0]T todenotethefamiliarlabel.
means that it can work even if clients adopt different model
Hence,Dk,d
datasetcontainstwocategoriesdataafterthisstep
structures. has finished. Then, the discriminator
wk,d
is trained with the
Dk,d
data set.
B. Proposed SSFL Scheme 3) Filter and Upload: The predictions of unlabeled open
samples in step 2 are filtered by the trained discriminator. We
FD leverages the knowledge of the clients by aggregating
first compute the discriminating result
dk,o
as
thelogitofeachclass;however, itcanonlyenhance thetrain- j
(cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:5)(cid:5)
ing effect of the corresponding class in each client, which
means that efficient classification for all classes cannot be d j k,o =argmax F xo j |wk,d . (15)
achievedwhenclientslacksamplesofsomeclasses.Thus,we
introduce an unlabeled open data set to solve this problem. The output of F(·|wk,d) is a 2-D vector. We regard argmax(·)
Our method can use global logit to identify what class each as the index of the max value of a vector. As discussed in
sample in the unlabeled data set pertains. Furthermore, since the previous step, if dk,o =0, xo is familiar to client k or the
j j
Authorized licensed use limited to: Bahcesehir Kibris University. Downloaded on January 01,2026 at 12:53:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- Page 6 ---
8650 IEEEINTERNETOFTHINGSJOURNAL,VOL.10,NO.10,15MAY2023
sampleisunfamiliar.Foreachsamplexo inDo,theprediction Algorithm 1: Pipeline of the Proposed Method on K
j
pˆk is filtered as follows: Clients for T Rounds
j
(cid:12) (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:5)(cid:5) for each client k in parallel do
argmax F xo|wk,c , if dk,o =0 1.Train the classifier:
pˆk j = −1, j if dk j ,o =1 (16) train its classifier wk,c via (11)
j for each xo in Do do
where we use “−1” to denote the sample is unfamiliar. Then,
comput
j
e
ck,o
via (12)
each client uploads the hard labels of unlabeled open data j
end
(i.e., {pˆk|j=1,2,...,No}) to the central server. Note that the
j 2.Train the discriminator:
unlabeled open data is the same for each client; however, the
create
Dk,d
via (13) and (14)
“familiar” samples in the unlabeled open data discriminated
train
wk,d
with
Dk,d
by the discriminator of each client are different.
3.Filter and upload:
4) Vote and Broadcast: For a sample xo, we consider that
j filter predictions via (16)
there are L voting sets, i.e., {Vj,0,Vj,1,...,Vj,L−1}. Class −1
upload predictions to server
is used to identify unfamiliar samples, so the class −1 is not
end
included in the L voting sets. For the predicted label pˆk of
j 4.Vote and broadcast (on the central server):
the sample, if pˆk (cid:8)=−1, this predicted label is added into the for j←1 to No do
j
corresponding voting set. vote and compute pˆs via (17)
j
After all clients input the predicted label of the sample end
(excluding unfamiliar samples) into the corresponding voting broadcast the vote result to each client
set, the central server determines the global hard label of this 5.Distillation:
sample according to the number of votes in each voting set. for each client k in parallel do
The global hard label of the sample is calculated as follows: train classifier via (18)
(cid:4)(cid:13)(cid:14) (cid:14) (cid:14) (cid:14) (cid:14) (cid:14)(cid:15)(cid:5)
(cid:14) (cid:14) (cid:14) (cid:14) (cid:14) (cid:14) end
pˆs =argmax (cid:14)Vj,0(cid:14),(cid:14)Vj,1(cid:14),...,(cid:14)Vj,L−1(cid:14) . (17)
j The 5 steps are iterated for T rounds
ˆs
Forsimplicity,weusematrixP torepresenttheconcatenated
{pˆs|j=1,2,...,No}. Finally, global hard labels (i.e., P ˆs ) are
j
broadcast to each client. camera) [39]. Among them, seven IoT devices have 11 cate-
5) Distillation: Each client treats itself as a student and gories of traffic: one benign traffic and ten attack traffic. The
uploads the predicted labels of unlabeled open data to the other two devices have six categories of traffic: one benign
central server, and then the aggregated global hard labels of traffic and five attack traffic. Each traffic packet has a total
unlabeled open data from the central server act as the teacher, of 115 features extracted from most recent five different time
where each local client model uses unlabeled open data with windows: 100 ms, 500 ms, 1.5 s, 10 s, and 1 min. These fea-
global hard labels for distillation training. The process is as tures can be computed quickly to meet the requirements of
follows: real-time detection of malicious traffic packets. The N-BaIoT
(cid:4) (cid:5)
wk,c ←wk,c−γ∇ψ
P
ˆk,c,P ˆs
(18)
datasethascomprehensive trafficcategories andalargenum-
ber of traffic records, so it is widely used in the field of
where P ˆk,c = F(Xo|wk,c). The classifier model of central intrusion detection as a baseline data set.
ˆs
serverisalsotrainedwithP anditwillbeusedforevaluation.
The overall training procedure of SSFL is illustrated in
B. Data Preprocessing
Algorithm 1.
We preprocess the data in three steps, namely, data set
partition, normalization, and two-dimensionalization.
V. EXPERIMENTALRESULTS
1) Data Partition: In the real world, there are usually a
In this section, we present and discuss our experimental
large number of clients with non-IID data participating in
results. In particular, the experiments will answer the three
FL training. Thus, we divide the raw data set to meet this
research questions.
deployment situation.
1) RQ1: Can SSFL achieve higher detection accuracy than
Using the raw data set for training and analysis requires
the state-of-the-art methods? (Section V-D).
expensive resources and infrastructure, so we first devised
2) RQ2: Can SSFL achieve faster training process and
a new data set mini-N-BaIoT consisting of 11 categories
lower communication overhead? (Section V-E).
of traffic from nine IoT devices. Specifically, we consider
3) RQ3: How effective is each component of SSFL in
the subdata sets of nine IoT devices in the raw data set as
improving performance? (Section V-F). D ,D ,...,D .D isdividedintoL subsetsaccordingto
d1 d2 d9 di di
the traffic category, which means that each subset D di ,l only
A. Description of Data Set
containstrafficdatawhosecategoryisl.Weselect1000traffic
The N-BaIoT data set is a public data set, which has nine datarecordsineachsubsetD di ,l asDm di i , n l i forthemini-N-BaIoT
subdatasetscollectedfromnineIoTdevices(e.g.,doorbelland data set.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Bahcesehir Kibris University. Downloaded on January 01,2026 at 12:53:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- Page 7 ---
ZHAOetal.:SEMISUPERVISEDFEDERATED-LEARNING-BASEDINTRUSIONDETECTIONMETHOD 8651
Fig.2. Schematicillustrationofsamplesperclassallocatedtoeachclientindifferentscenarios,wherethex-axisindicatesclientIDs,they-axisindicates
classlabels,andthesizeofscatteredpointsindicatesthenumberoflabeledsamples.(a)Scenario1.(b)Scenario2.(c)Scenario3.
Then, our new data set is divided into private data set Dp, follows:
⎡ ⎤
open data set Do, and test data set Dtest according to the
x i,0 x i,23 x i,46 x i,69 x i,92
proportion of 70%, 10%, and 20%. Note that each set is dis- ⎢ ⎥
⎢x i,1 x i,24 x i,47 x i,70 x i,93⎥
joint with the other two sets, and Do does not contain the x i =⎢ ⎢x i,2 x i,25 x i,48 x i,71 x i,94 ⎥ ⎥ . (19)
label. ⎣··· ··· ··· ··· ··· ⎦
Note that all data records of Dp are part of D and Dp is
di x i,22 x i,45 x i,68 x i,91 x i,114
distributed to K clients in the following three scenarios for
di
experiments.
1) Scenario 1: Dp is sorted by its classification label and C. Experiment Setup
isdividedinto2×K
di
shardsofsize|Dp|/(2K
di
)among
Tocomprehensivelyevaluatetheperformanceandverifythe
which two shards are assigned to each client. In this scalability of the method, we conduct evaluations in three
scenario,K di issetto3.Thisstrategyfollowsthepioneer different scenarios. The data distributions in the three sce-
study [31]. narios are all non-IID, but the data splitting strategies are
2) Scenario 2: The distribution strategy in Scenario 2 is different (see Fig. 2). Scenario 2 and Scenario 3 both con-
similar to Scenario 1 but K di is equal to L di . So if tain 89 clients, which means that the traffic data of each
D di contains 11 categories traffic data, K di is 11. If D di client in Scenario 2 and Scenario 3 are less than Scenario 1
contains six categories traffic data, K di is 6. (27 clients). In Scenario 3, the dirichlet data splitting strategy
3) Scenario 3: In this scenario, we use a dirichlet distribu- (α =0.1) is used to distributing the private data set. To make
tion Dir(α), in which a smaller α indicates higher data the experimental evaluation clearer, we introduce the exper-
heterogeneity. We set α =0.1 in experiments and K di is imental environment, implementation details, and evaluation
equal to L di . metrics as follows.
Afterthepartition,thedistributionsofthesedatasetssatisfy 1) Experimental Environment: All the evaluations are con-
the following conditions. ducted in Python 3.7 with the PyTorch framework of ver-
1) The private data set of client k only comes from one sion 1.9.0 and running on the PC with Intel Core i9-
device and this is consistent with the real world. 11900K@3.50 GHz, 64-GB RAM, and an NVIDIA GeForce
2) The amount of data and classes of data owned by dif- RTX3090 GPU.
ferent clients are quite different. The distribution is 2) Implementation Details: In the training phase, we train
non-IID. themodelwithanAdamoptimizer.Thelearningrate,thebatch
3) The intersection of Do, Dp, and Dtest with each other is size, and the local train epochs in each communication round
the empty set. is set to 0.0001, 100, and 5, respectively. The threshold θ for
Fig. 2 shows the examples of distribution results of three judging unfamiliar samples is not set to a fixed value for all
scenarios, where the x-axis indicates client IDs, y-axis indi- clients. For a specific client, this value was set to the median
cates labels, and the size of scattered points indicates the of the clients’ predicted probabilities.
number of training samples. 3) EvaluationMetrics: Tomeasuretheperformanceofour
2) Normalization: Since the traffic data have features of method, we calculate the number of true positive (T ), true
p
different dimensions, the level of each dimension of the data negative (T ), false positive (F ), and false negative (F ).
n p n
set varies greatly. To train our model more effectively, the Based on the above definition, recall, precision, and F can
1
values of features are scaled to numbers between 0 and 1 be obtained
using min–max normalization.
T
3) Dimensionalization: Each sample X has 115 features, Recall = p (20)
i T +F
p n
which can be divided into five parts according to the time
T
window. So we divide the vectorized feature of a sam- Precision= p (21)
T +F
ple into five parts and transfer the vector to a matrix, p p
which has five columns and 23 rows to input the sample F =2·
Precision·Recall
. (22)
to the CNN model proposed in the next. The detail is as 1 Precision+Recall
Authorized licensed use limited to: Bahcesehir Kibris University. Downloaded on January 01,2026 at 12:53:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- Page 8 ---
8652 IEEEINTERNETOFTHINGSJOURNAL,VOL.10,NO.10,15MAY2023
TABLEII
COMPARISONOFMETRICSWITHOTHERMETHODS
D. Detection Performance of SSFL for Intrusion Detection FLschemeachievesgooddetectionperformance,buttheprob-
lems of huge communication overhead cannot be ignored,
In this experiment, we evaluate the detection performance
which will be discussed later. The FL scheme also suffers
of different methods by measuring Accuracy, F -Score, and
1
from the risk of gradient leakage, that is, the attacker can
Precision. Our SSFL is compared with the following five
recover the raw data through the model parameters uploaded
baseline methods.
by the client, which means that the FL scheme is not very
The detailed description of the three federated training
secure [29]. Our method uploads hard labels from each client
schemes(i.e.,FL,FD,andDS-FL)canbefoundinSectionIII.
instead of gradients or parameters, making attack methods
FL is the most common scheme in federated learning, which
that recover user data from uploaded gradients infeasible. Our
directly aggregates model parameters uploaded by different
scheme achieves more effective federated training for the fol-
clients. FD is proposed by Jeong et al. as a distillation-
lowing reasons: 1) similar to the DS-FL, we also leverage
based FL scheme that clients share per-class logits instead
open data to better suit the case of non-IID data distribution;
ofmodelparameters.DS-FL isproposedbyItaharaetal.[31]
2) the discriminator of each client can significantly improve
that leverages the exchanged model outputs to label the
the quality of predicted labels; and 3) the voting mechanism
unlabeled open data. Compared with DS-FL scheme, our
of the central server can effectively aggregate the training
method has two key differences: 1) we take the discrimi-
results from different clients. We can also find that the detec-
nator to improve the quality of uploaded labels and 2) our
tion performance of both the LSTM model and the MLP
hard-label strategy and voting mechanism can further reduce
model is lower than our CNN model. Besides, the federated
the communication overhead. Moreover, MLP and LSTM are
training task of Scenario 3 is the most challenging, which
introduced to compare the detection performance with our
also results in a lower accuracy of SSFL than the other two
CNNmodel,andbotharetrainedusingourscheme.Toensure
scenarios.
fair comparison, we perform on the same data set in dif-
To further evaluate the classification performance of SSFL,
ferent scenarios, and carefully follow the same evaluation
we analyze the confusion matrices of SSFL in the three sce-
protocol.
narios on the test data set. As shown in Fig. 3, SSFL can
Table II illustrates the results. We can observe that SSFL
effectively classify different traffic categories, and the detec-
outperforms other baselines with a considerable margin. In
tion accuracy of benign traffic in all three scenarios reaches
the federated training manner, neither FD nor DS-FL can
more than 99%. G_TCP and G_UDP are two categories of
achieve high detection accuracy. Specifically, the detection
attack traffic that are easily confused. We conjecture this
accuracy of FD in Scenarios 1 and 3 is about 50%, and
is largely due to that they are both DoS attacks and have
the accuracy rate in Scenario 2 is only 22.12%. There are
very similar characteristics. It can be concluded that our
two reasons: 1) the distillation training of FD is difficult to
schemewiththeexcellentdetectionperformanceissuitablefor
implement when the data distribution is non-IID (i.e., the
federatedtraininganddetectingintrusionsintheIoTnetworks.
local data of the client cannot represent the population dis-
tribution), so the highest accuracy is obtained by one client
trained with its local traffic data and 2) in Scenario 2, each E. Communication Efficiency of the Proposed SSFL Method
client has fewer categories of traffic, which leads to lower Tables III and IV answer RQ2 by showing the results of
accuracy. Since the best detection performance of FD is our model against baselines. In overall, SSFL achieves faster
obtained by a single client, it can be considered that the FD training process and lower communication overhead.
method is ineffective in the case of non-IID data distribu- In terms of learning efficiency, we can observe from
tion. The accuracy of DS-FL is higher than that of FD in Table III that SSFL has the fastest learning speed with excel-
Scenario 1 and Scenario 2, indicating that the introduction of lentperformanceandoutperformsotherbaselines.Specifically,
unlabeled open data improves the usability of the distillation- SSFL achieves high accuracy in the first ten epochs, and
based FL under non-IID data distribution. However, the more achieves convergence around 150 epochs. Our multiple mech-
unevendatadistributioninScenario3makesDS-FLunableto anisms jointly obtain high-quality global labels for federated
predict correctly on the open data, resulting in poor detection training, which are undoubtedly the key to achieve fast con-
performance. As a traditional federated training scheme, the vergence and high performance. The Top-1 accuracy of the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Bahcesehir Kibris University. Downloaded on January 01,2026 at 12:53:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- Page 9 ---
ZHAOetal.:SEMISUPERVISEDFEDERATED-LEARNING-BASEDINTRUSIONDETECTIONMETHOD 8653
Fig.3. ConfusionmatricesofSSFLonthetestdataset.(a)Scenario1.(b)Scenario2.(c)Scenario3.
TABLEIII
COMPARISONOFTOP-1TESTACCURACYWITHOTHERMETHODSATDIFFERENTCOMMUNICATIONROUND
TABLEIV
COMPARISONOFCOMMUNICATIONOVERHEADANDTOP-ACC
FL scheme as 200 epochs is still far from the highest accu- FL method communicates model parameters in each round,
racy, which reflects that the speed of federated training by the large model size leads to huge communication overhead.
directly averaging parameters is slow. In addition, FD and The communication overhead of other three distillation-based
DS-FLquicklyreachtheupperlimitofdetectionperformance methodsdependsonlyontheoutputdimensionsofthemodels
and cannot further improve performance through communica- and does not scale up according to the model size, so these
tion. The convergence speed of MLP and LSTM models is schemes can achieve low communication costs. Furthermore,
slower than that of CNN models. Since our method is not the client in our proposed method uploads the hard labels
affected by the size of model parameters, subsequent exper- of local predictions, so the communication overhead is much
iments on communication overhead are not implemented on lowerthanDS-FLinwhichaclientneedstouploadthevectors
MLP and LSTM models. oflocalpredictions.Unfortunately,bothDS-FLandFDmeth-
TableIVliststhecommunicationoverheadofeachmethod. ods have not achieved satisfactory detection performance due
NotethatinFLandFD,thereisnoneedtodistributetheopen to the lack of effective mechanisms to deal with non-IID
data set to each client. From this table, we notice that our private traffic data. It can be concluded from Table IV that
proposed method is communication efficient and the amount SSFL has the best overall performance because of its high
of data uploaded by our method is very small. Since the classification accuracy and communication efficiency.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Bahcesehir Kibris University. Downloaded on January 01,2026 at 12:53:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- Page 10 ---
8654 IEEEINTERNETOFTHINGSJOURNAL,VOL.10,NO.10,15MAY2023
Fig.4. TestaccuracycurvesofourSSFL,oursw/ovoting,oursw/odiscriminating,oursw/odiscriminatingandvoting,andsimplyfiltering.(a)Scenario1.
(b)Scenario2.(c)Scenario3.
Fig.5. Impactofconfidencethresholdθ c.(a)Scenario1.(b)Scenario2.(c)Scenario3.
F. Ablation Study the voting mechanism makes the model performance worse
whentheclientmakestoomanyincorrectpredictions.Inother
Tofurtherexaminethelevelofbenefitthateachcomponent
words, the voting mechanism is a voting majority, so it needs
of SSFL brings to the performance, we conduct a three-stage
to be used in conjunction with a discriminator that improves
ablation study on SSFL. In the first stage, we ablate different
the quality of client predicted labels. Moreover, the filtering
key components and analyze the detection accuracy. In the
method, on its own, cannot effectively deal with the prob-
second stage, we further evaluate the impact of different con-
lems caused by non-IID private data. In Scenario 3, the
fidence thresholds. In the third stage, we analyze the impact
extremely uneven data distribution makes the simply filtering
of different labeling strategies on detection performance and
completely ineffective. Thus, it could be concluded that both
communication overhead.
discriminatingandvotingcontributetoSSFLtoaconsiderable
As shown in Fig. 4, we first ablate discriminating, voting,
extent.
and both discriminating and voting from our method. Note
θ isakeyhyperparameterofourmethod.Asshownin(12)
that the discriminating corresponds to the third to fifth steps and c (14), if ck,o < θ , the sample xo will be regraded
of our method (see the description in Section IV). Without j c j
as “unfamiliar” to client k and will be used to train the
thediscriminating,clientk makespredictionsonallunlabeled
discriminator. So the values of θ can have a certain influ-
samples, including familiar and unfamiliar ones. Besides, we c
ence on the performance of our method. In this section,
evaluate the detection performance of using simply filtering
we set the value of to 0.9, 0.8, 0.7, and the median value.
instead of the discriminator. In simply filtering, whether an
More specifically, we consider the set of confidence scores
open sample xo j is familiar or not only depends on whether its is Ck = {ck,o|j = 1,2,...,No} and the median mentioned
confidence score ck j ,o is less than the threshold θ s (i.e., also above is the j median of this set. As shown in Fig. 5, when
withoutthediscriminator),andthethresholdθ s foreachclient we set a fixed value of θ c for all clients participating in our
isequaltothemedianconfidencescoreofitspredictedlabels. method, the performance is worse than that the value of θ is
If c j k,o < θ s , the prediction pˆk j of xo j will be set −1. It can medianvalueofCk.Furthermore,comparingtheresultsof c the
be seen that the removal of discriminating in all three scenar- three scenarios, we can observe that using the median value
ios leads to significant performance drops, which illustrates as the confidence threshold has a greater performance advan-
the necessity of discriminator for improving the quality of tage if the client has less local labeled data with fewer traffic
each client’s predicted labels. Obviously, the use of the dis- categories.
criminator has the largest impact on detection performance. We also investigate the impact of labeling strategies on
The ablation research on the voting mechanism shows that detection performance and communication overhead. Our
Authorized licensed use limited to: Bahcesehir Kibris University. Downloaded on January 01,2026 at 12:53:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- Page 11 ---
ZHAOetal.:SEMISUPERVISEDFEDERATED-LEARNING-BASEDINTRUSIONDETECTIONMETHOD 8655
Fig.6. Testaccuracycurveandcommunicationoverheadcurveofdifferentlabelstrategies.“SoftLabelw.xf”meansthataclientuploadssoftlabelstothe
serverandeachfloatnumberinthesoftlabelsisroundeddownto“x”decimalplaces.(a)Scenario1.(b)Scenario2.(c)Scenario3.
motivation for adopting the hard-label strategy is not to first distillation-based FL method in the field of traffic classi-
improve the detection performance, but to reduce the commu- fication. Our key idea is to leverage the unlabeled open data
nicationoverheadgeneratedduringfederatedtraining.Thesoft for enhancing the classifier performance. Then, we build a
labelofasampleisaprobabilityvectorinwhicheachnumber CNN-based model for extracting deep features of the traffic
is a float number of double type. Before a client uploads this packets,andtakethismodelasboththeclassifiernetworkand
vector,eachdoublenumberinthisvectorcanberoundeddown discriminator network. The discriminator is used to improve
to a certain decimal places in order to reduce the memory the quality of each client’s predicted labels, which avoids the
size of soft labels. As shown in Fig. 6, rounding down to failure of distillation training caused by a large number of
8, 6, 4, or 2 decimal places can achieve almost same accu- incorrect predictions under private non-IID data. Additionally,
racy but the communication overhead is quite different. The we further reduce communication overhead with hard-label
results show that the fewer decimal places kept, the lower the strategy and voting mechanism. To simulate the real deploy-
communicationoverhead.Therefore,uploadinghardlabelscan mentenvironmentintheIoTnetwork(i.e.,withalargenumber
greatly reduce the communication overhead at the same time of devices and uneven traffic data distribution), we set up
achieving high detection performance. threechallengingscenariostoevaluateourmethod.Theexper-
imental results show that SSFL can achieve better detection
performance as well as lower communication overhead than
VI. CONCLUSION other schemes. Our method meets the security, accuracy, and
In this article, we proposed a semisupervised FL scheme efficiency required for federated training and detecting intru-
viaknowledgedistillationforintrusiondetection,whichisthe sionsintheIoTnetwork.Infuturework,wewillsetastrategy
Authorized licensed use limited to: Bahcesehir Kibris University. Downloaded on January 01,2026 at 12:53:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- Page 12 ---
8656 IEEEINTERNETOFTHINGSJOURNAL,VOL.10,NO.10,15MAY2023
to score the client’s contribution, which can better solve the [22] Y. Liu et al., “Boosting privately: Federated extreme gradient boost-
situation where malicious clients affect federated training. ing for mobile crowdsensing,” in Proc. IEEE 40th Int. Conf. Distrib.
Comput.Syst.(ICDCS),Singapore,Nov./Dec.2020,pp.1–11.
[23] Y.Wang,G.Gui,H.Gacanin,T.Ohtsuki,O.A.Dobre,andH.V.Poor,
“An efficient specific emitter identification method based on complex-
REFERENCES valued neural networks and network compression,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas
Commun.,vol.39,no.8,pp.2305–2317,Aug.2021.
[1] H.Yao,P.Gao,P.Zhang,J.Wang,C.Jiang,andL.Lu,“Hybridintrusion [24] N. Zhang and M. Tao, “Gradient statistics aware power control for
detectionsystemforedge-basedIIoTrelyingonmachine-learning-aided over-the-airfederatedlearning,”IEEETrans.WirelessCommun.,vol.20,
detection,”IEEENetw.,vol.33,no.5,pp.75–81,Sep./Oct.2019. no.8,pp.5115–5128,Aug.2021.
[2] S. Rajendran, Z. Sun, F. Lin, and K. Ren, “Injecting reliable radio [25] B.McMahan,E.Moore,D.Ramage,S.Hampson,andB.A.Y.Arcas,
frequency fingerprints using metasurface for the Internet of Things,” “Communication-efficientlearningofdeepnetworksfromdecentralized
IEEETrans.Inf.ForensicsSecurity,vol.16,pp.1896–1911,Dec.2020, data,”inProc.AISTATS,Cadiz,Spain,May2016,pp.1273–1282.
doi:10.1109/TIFS.2020.3045318. [26] F. Ang, L. Chen, N. Zhao, Y. Chen, W. Wang, and F. R. Yu, “Robust
[3] S. I. Popoola, B. Adebisi, M. Hammoudeh, G. Gui, and H. Gacanin, federatedlearningwith noisycommunication,”IEEETrans. Commun.,
“Hybrid deep learning for botnet attack detection in the Internet of vol.68,no.6,pp.3452–3464,Jun.2020.
Thingsnetworks,”IEEEInternetThingsJ.,vol.8,no.6,pp.4944–4956, [27] X. Fu et al., “Lightweight automatic modulation classification based
Mar.2021,doi:10.1109/JIOT.2020.3034156. ondecentralizedlearning,”IEEETrans.Cogn.Commun.Netw.,vol.8,
[4] S.Bu,F.R.Yu,X.P.Liu,andH.Tang,“Structuralresultsforcombined no.1,pp.57–70,Mar.2022,doi:10.1109/TCCN.2021.3089178.
continuous user authentication and intrusion detection in high secu- [28] Y.Liuetal.,“Deepanomalydetectionfortime-seriesdatainIndustrial
rity mobile ad-hoc networks,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol.10, no.9, IoT:Acommunication-efficienton-devicefederatedlearningapproach,”
pp.3064–3073,Sep.2011. IEEEInternetThingsJ.,vol.8,no.8,pp.6348–6358,Apr.2021.
[5] G. Bovenzi, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, V. Persico, and A. Pescape, “A [29] L. Zhu and S. Han, “Deep leakage from gradients,” in Proc. Feder.
hierarchical hybrid intrusion detection approach in IoT scenarios,” in Learn.,2020,pp.17–31.
Proc.GLOBECOM,Taipei,Taiwan,Dec.2020,pp.1–7. [30] E Jeong, S. Oh, H. Kim, J. Park, M. Bennis, and S. Kim,
[6] R.Zhaoetal..,“Anovelintrusiondetectionmethodbasedonlightweight “Communication-efficient on-device machine learning: Federated dis-
neural network for Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., early tillation and augmentation under non-IID private data,” in Proc. NIPS,
access,Oct.11,2020,doi:10.1109/JIOT.2021.3119055. Dec.2018,pp.1–6.
[7] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An [31] S. Itahara, T. Nishio, Y. Koda, M. Morikura, and K. Yamamoto,
ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” in “Distillation-based semi-supervised federated learning for
Proc.NDSS,SanDiego,CA,USA,Feb.2018,pp.1–15. communication-efficient collaborative training with non-IID pri-
[8] L. Yang, A. Moubayed, and A. Shami, “MTH-IDS: A multi-tiered vate data,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., early access, Mar. 31, 2021,
hybridintrusiondetectionsystemforInternetofVehicles,”IEEEInternet doi:10.1109/TMC.2021.3070013.
ThingsJ.,vol.9,no.1,pp.616–632,Jan.2022. [32] D.Sui,Y.Chen,J.Zhao,Y.Jia,Y.Xie,andW.Sun,“FedED:Federated
[9] T.Ye,G.Li,I.Ahmad,C.Zhang,X.Lin,andJ.Li,“FLAG:Few-shot learning via ensemble distillation for medical relation extraction,” in
latentDirichletgenerativelearningforsemantic-awaretrafficdetection,” Proc.EMNLP,Nov.2020,pp.2118–2128.
IEEETrans.Netw.ServiceManag.,vol.19,no.1,pp.73–88,Mar.2022. [33] Z.MaandA.Kaban,“K-nearest-neighbourswithanovelsimilaritymea-
[10] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Realtime robust malicious traf- sureforintrusiondetection,”inProc.UKCI,Guildford,U.K.,Sep.2013,
fic detection via frequency domain analysis,” in Proc. CCS, Virtual, pp.266–271.
SouthKorea,Nov.2021,pp.3431–3446. [34] R. Kumari, Sheetanshu, M. K. Singh, R. Jha, and N. K. Singh,
“Anomaly detection in network traffic using K-mean clustering,”
[11] L. Yang, A. Moubayed, I. Hamieh, and A. Shami, “Tree-based intel-
in Proc. RAIT, Dhanbad, India, Mar. 2016, pp.387–393, doi:
ligent intrusion detection system in Internet of Vehicles,” in Proc.
10.1109/RAIT.2016.7507933.
GLOBECOM,Dec.2019,pp.1–6.
[35] M.UshaandP.Kavitha,“Anomalybasedintrusiondetectionfor802.11
[12] G. Gui, M. Liu, F. Tang, N. Kato, and F. Adachi, “6G: Opening new
networks with optimal features using SVM classifier,” Wireless Netw.,
horizons for integration of comfort, security and intelligence,” IEEE
vol.23,no.8,pp.2431–2446,2017.
WirelessCommun.Mag.,vol.27,no.5,pp.126–132,Oct.2020.
[36] Y. Shen, K. Zheng, C. Wu, M. Zhang, X. Niu, and Y. Yang, “An
[13] Y. Lin, J. Wang, Y. Tu, L. Chen, and Z. Dou, “Time-related
ensemblemethodbasedonselectionusingBATalgorithmforintrusion
network intrusion detection model: A deep learning method,” in Proc.
detection,”Comput.J.,vol.61,no.4,pp.526–538,2018.
GLOBECOM,Dec.2019,pp.1–6.
[37] H.Wang,J.Gu,andS.Wang,“Aneffectiveintrusiondetectionframe-
[14] G.Andresini,A.Appice,andD.Malerba,“Nearestcluster-basedintru-
work based on SVM with feature augmentation,” Knowl. Based Syst.,
sion detection through convolutional neural networks,” Knowl. Based
vol.139,pp.130–139,Nov.2017.
Syst.,vol.216,Mar.2021,Art.no.106798.
[38] Q.Qin,K.Poularakis,K.K.Leung,andL.Tassiulas,“Line-speedand
[15] Y. Cheng, J. Lu, D. Niyato, B. Lyu, J. Kang, and S. Zhu, “Federated
scalableintrusiondetectionatthenetworkedgeviafederatedlearning,”
transferlearningwithclient selectionforintrusiondetectioninmobile
inProc.IFIPNetw.Conf.,Paris,France,Jun.2020,pp.352–360.
edge computing,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 26, no. 3, pp.552–556,
[39] Y. Meidan et al., “N-BaIoT: Network-based detection of IoT botnet
Mar.2022,doi:10.1109/LCOMM.2022.3140273.
attacks using deep autoencoders,” IEEE Pervasive Comput., vol.17,
[16] J. Kang, Z. Xiong, D. Niyato, S. Xie, and J. Zhang, “Incentive mech- no.3,pp.12–22,Jul.–Sep.2018.
anism for reliable federated learning: A joint optimization approach
tocombiningreputationandcontracttheory,”IEEEInternetThingsJ.,
vol.6,no.6,pp.10700–10714,Dec.2019.
[17] S. I. Popoola, R. Ande, B. Adebisi, G. Gui, M. Hammoudeh, and
O.Jogunola,“Federateddeeplearningforzero-daybotnetattackdetec-
tion in IoT edge devices,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 5,
pp.3930–3944,Mar.2022,doi:10.1109/JIOT.2021.3100755.
[18] N. A. A.-A. Al-Marri, B. S. Ciftler, and M. Abdallah, “Federated
MIMIC learning for privacy preserving intrusion detection,” in Proc.
BlackSeaCom,Odessa,Ukraine,May2020,pp.1–6. Ruijie Zhao (Graduate Student Member, IEEE)
[19] X. Hei, X. Yin, Y. Wang, J. Ren, and L. Zhu, “A trusted feature received the M.S. degree from Shanghai Jiao Tong
aggregatorfederatedlearningfordistributedmaliciousattackdetection,” University, Shanghai, China, in 2021, where he
Comput.Security,vol.99,Dec.2020,Art.no.102033. is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the
School of Electronic Information and Electrical
[20] Z.Zhangetal.,“Robustsemi-supervisedfederatedlearningforimages
Engineering.
automatic recognition in Internet of Drones,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
His research interests include machine learning,
earlyaccess,Feb.16,2022,doi:10.1109/JIOT.2022.3151945.
networksecurity,andInternetofThings.
[21] K. Yang, T. Jiang, Y. Shi, and Z. Ding, “Federated learning via over-
the-air computation,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol.19, no.3,
pp.2022–2035,Mar.2020.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Bahcesehir Kibris University. Downloaded on January 01,2026 at 12:53:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- Page 13 ---
ZHAOetal.:SEMISUPERVISEDFEDERATED-LEARNING-BASEDINTRUSIONDETECTIONMETHOD 8657
Yijun Wang received the B.S. and M.S. degrees BamideleAdebisi(SeniorMember,IEEE)received
from Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, the bachelor’s degree in electrical engineering
China,in2001and2004,respectively. from Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria, Nigeria,
He is currently an Engineer with the School in 1999, and the master’s degree in advanced
of Electronic Information and and Electrical mobile communication engineering and the Ph.D.
Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University. His degree in communication systems from Lancaster
research interests include system security, network University, Lancaster, U.K., in 2003 and 2009,
security,andmachinelearning. respectively.
He was a Senior Research Associate with
the School of Computing and Communication,
LancasterUniversityfrom2005to2012.Hejoined
the Manchester Metropolitan University, Manchester, U.K., in 2012, where
heiscurrentlyaFullProfessor(Chair)ofIntelligentInfrastructureSystems.
He has published over 140 peer-review papers and given several talks/panel
discussions in the research areas of Internet of Things, smart cities, smart
Zhi Xue receivedtheB.S.andPh.D.degreesfrom grids,communicationsystems,andcyberphysicalsystems.
ShanghaiJiaoTongUniversity,Shanghai,China,in Prof.Adebisireceivedthe2020U.K.BestKnowledgeTransferPartnership
1992and2001,respectively. Project of the Year Awards for one of his projects with an SME. He is
He is currently a Professor with the School of currently the Vice Chair of IEEE TC-PLC, and was the General Chair of
Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, IEEEISPLC’18,U.K.,andtheCo-Chairofthe6thIEEEInt’lConferenceon
ShanghaiJiaoTongUniversity.Hisresearchinterests SmartGridCommunications,Miami,U.S.,in2015.HeisaPanelMemberof
includemachinelearning,networksecurity,anddata the U.K. Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council Peer Review
science. College,andanEUH2020ExpertReviewer/Rapporteur.Hehasbeenpartof
multipartner,multicountry,multimillionpoundsprojectsasPIandCo-I.Heis
aFellowofIET,andHigherEducationAcademy,andaCharteredEngineer.
Guan Gui (Senior Member, IEEE) was born
in Zongyang county, Anhui, China, in 1982. He
received the Ph.D. degree from the University
of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
Chengdu,China,in2012.
From 2009 to 2014, he joined the Tohoku
TomoakiOhtsuki(SeniorMember,IEEE)received University,Sendai,Japan,asaResearchAssistantas
theB.E.,M.E.,andPh.D.degreesinelectricalengi- wellasaPostdoctoralResearchFellow.From2014
neeringfromKeioUniversity,Yokohama,Japan,in to 2015, he was an Assistant Professor with Akita
1990,1992,and1994,respectively. PrefecturalUniversity,Akita,Japan.Since2015,he
From1994to1995,hewasaPostdoctoralFellow has been a Professor with Nanjing University of
andaVisitingResearcherofElectricalEngineering PostsandTelecommunications,Nanjing,China.Hehaspublishedmorethan
with Keio University. From 1993 to 1995, he was 200IEEEjournal/conferencepapersandwonseveralbestpaperawards,e.g.,
a Special Researcher of Fellowships of the Japan ICC 2017, ICC 2014, and VTC 2014-Spring. His recent research interests
Society for the Promotion of Science for Japanese includeintelligencesensingandrecognition,intelligentsignalprocessing,and
Junior Scientists. From 1995 to 2005, he was with physicallayersecurity.
ScienceUniversityofTokyo,Tokyo,Japan.In2005, Dr.GuireceivedtheIEEECommunicationsSocietyHeinrichHertzAward
he joined Keio University, where he is currently a Professor. From 1998 to in 2021, the Top 2% Scientists of the World by Stanford University in
1999, he was with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer 2021, the Clarivate Analytics Highly Cited Researcher in Cross-Field in
Sciences, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA. He is 2021, the Highly Cited Chinese Researchers by Elsevier in 2020 and 2021,
engaged in research on wireless communications, optical communications, the Member and Global Activities Contributions Award in 2018, the Top
signal processing, and information theory. He has published more than 205 Editor Award of IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology in 2019, the
journalpapersand415internationalconferencepapers. Outstanding Journal Service Award of KSII Transactions on Internet and
Dr. Ohtsuki is a recipient of the 1997 Inoue Research Award for Young Information System in 2020, the Exemplary Reviewer Award of IEEE
Scientist, the 1997 Hiroshi Ando Memorial Young Engineering Award, the COMMUNICATIONSLETTERSin2017,the2012JapanSocietyforPromotion
Ericsson Young Scientist Award 2000, the 2002 Funai Information and of Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowships for Foreign Researchers, and
Science Award for Young Scientist, the IEEE the 1st Asia–Pacific Young the 2018 JSPS International Fellowships for Overseas Researchers. He was
Researcher Award 2001, the 5th International Communication Foundation also selected as the Jiangsu Specially Appointed Professor in 2016, the
Research Award, the 2011 IEEE SPCE Outstanding Service Award, the Jiangsu High-level Innovation and Entrepreneurial Talent in 2016, and the
27th TELECOM System Technology Award, the ETRI Journal’s 2012 Best Jiangsu Six Top Talent in 2018. Since 2022, he has been a Distinguished
Reviewer Award, and the 9th International Conference on Communications Lecturer of the IEEE Vehicular Technology Society. He is a member of
andNetworkinginChina2014BestPaperAward.HeservedastheChairof the IEEE Communications Society and the IEEE Vehicular Technology
IEEE Communications Society, and Signal Processing for Communications Society. He is serving or served on the editorial boards of several jour-
and Electronics Technical Committee. He served as a Technical Editor of nals, including IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY,
the IEEE Wireless Communications Magazine and an Editor of Physical IEICE Transactions on Communications, Physical Communication, Wireless
Communications (Elsevier). He is currently serving as an Area Editor of Networks, IEEE ACCESS, Journal of Circuits Systems and Computers,
the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY and an Editor Security and Communication Networks, IEICE Communications Express,
oftheIEEECOMMUNICATIONSSURVEYSANDTUTORIALS.Hehasserved KSII Transactions on Internet and Information Systems, and Journal on
astheGeneralCo-Chair,SymposiumCo-Chair,andTPCCo-Chairofmany Communications.Inaddition,heservedastheIEEEVTSAdHocCommittee
conferences,includingIEEEGLOBECOM2008,SPC,IEEEICC2011,CTS, Member in AI Wireless, the TPC Chair of PRAI 2022, ICGIP 2022, PHM
IEEEGLOBECOM2012,SPC,IEEEICC2020,SPC,IEEEAPWCS,IEEE 2021,andWiMob2020,theExecutiveChairofVTC2021-Fall,theViceChair
SPAWC, and IEEE VTC. He gave tutorials and keynote speeches at many ofWCNC2021,theSymposiumChairofWCSP2021,theGeneralCo-Chair
international conferences, including IEEE VTC, IEEE PIMRC, and IEEE of Mobimedia 2020, the Track Chair of EuCNC 2021 and 2022 and VTC
WCNC.HewastheVicePresidentandthePresidentoftheCommunications 2020 Spring, the Award Chair of PIMRC 2019, and the TPC Member of
SocietyofIEICE.HeisaDistinguishedLecturerofIEEE,aFellowofIEICE, manyIEEEinternationalconferences,includingGLOBECOM,ICC,WCNC,
andamemberoftheEngineeringAcademyofJapan. PIRMC,VTC,andSPAWC.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Bahcesehir Kibris University. Downloaded on January 01,2026 at 12:53:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.